This is an interview with Lieutenant General
James Hollingsworth up at Hearst, Texas. Today is
Wednesday, the 18th of August, 1982.
The first thing I'd like to ask you to do is donate.
Would you please donate this tape and all the
information on this tape to Texas A&M University?
I'd be happy to do that. Okay, now let's start right
now with your early years. You were born here in
Texas. Could you tell me about your parents?
Yes, sir. I was born on the 24th of March, 1918.
the first son of James Newton Hollingsworth and
Mamie Ella Hollingsworth.
They were the sole owners of a small ranch and farm
seven miles north and west of Sanger, Texas.
property was
in located in Denton and Cook County crossing the
borders between the two counties
in the Union Hill community area
I uh
Went to school some one mile away to the Union Hill
School, which consists of three teachers and
three rooms.
Through the eighth grade,
I walked to school.
rain or shine or mud or snow or whatever it might be.
In those days you carried your lunch in a small pail
and the lunch was usually made up of the leftovers
from breakfast.
Which could very well be two biscuits and two
pieces of sausage.
Or a light few pieces of bacon and biscuits.
Was your father a farmer, though? My father was a
farmer. and
the hardest working man I've ever met in my life.
Tell me more about him. What kind of character was
he? He was a very strong-charactered man, a very
disciplined man. He had moved from Alabama to
Texas with his parents when he was about age
ten and
uh his father paid cash for this three hundred
acres of land and
uh
my fathers my grandfather and his my grandmother
raised
one daughter and seven sons, of which my father was
the oldest. He was a very strong man, a
self-educated man, had been through the third
grade formal schooling, and had read everything
that he could get his hands on. and I shall always
remember they subscribed. My mother had, my
father was 44 years old when I was born, and my
mother was much younger, 20 years or more younger
than my father. And he was a disciplinarian in the
sense that not, As most civilians understand
discipline, you know, in civilian side of life,
most civilians treat discipline as a punishment.
Well, discipline isn't a punishment. Discipline
is the art of learning, learning to do things well.
And in that extent, he was a disciplinarian
because he insisted that the children learn to do
things well. and honesty and integrity and to
stand up for what you believe in. And that's the
kind of a man he was. How about your mother? My
mother was a wonderful woman who, as I say, much
younger than my father, who was out of a Scottish
family. of Browning's.
Her father and mother were more or less
sharecroppers. Since my father was a landowner, I
think that I could see a little resentment at times
to the
basic philosophy of my mother's father and
mother. to his. For example, I've heard him say at
times that socialism is the worst thing in the
world and that free enterprise and ownership and I
guess the thing that he hated worst was to have to
borrow money in order maybe to put in a part of a crop
or to buy a piece of equipment or something like
that. He hated that worse than anything. He was one
who felt like that if you don't have the money to pay
for it, that doesn't represent true ownership.
So, he and of course my mother were just worked
themselves to death, so to speak. I remember that
from the time I was six years old.
But I could always, when I was a little larger, I
could detect that sensitivity to his
feelings toward,
and he never made any derogatory remarks about my
mother's family being sharecroppers because
they had a large family too, 12 or 13. children, and
they all married well. Some married preachers,
some married farmers, some married
day laborers and this sort of stuff. But my mom was
just a magnificent person that did everything and
worked so hard doing everything, you know, on the
farm, cooking. Some days she'd go to the fields
with us. when I was large enough to go to the field
and work, particularly during the harvest, the
grain, the cotton, the corn. I suppose when I was
seven years old, I was walking a mile to the north of
our pasture land through the fields in order to
drive in the herd of cattle for the evening when I
was seven years old. So, I started pretty young. By
the time I was ten years old, I had the
responsibility of from twenty-five to thirty
black workers during the harvest all during the
summer from the time school was out in May until we
started back to school in September. I began
responsibilities for supervising and managing
those. My father turned that over to me. at ten, at
age ten. So he gave you quite a bit of
responsibility as a young man. Yes, and he taught
me a lot about how to deal with people. He said you
have to learn to treat them all alike, and I
remember one of the first questions I asked him
about that was, I said, well, Dad, I've learned
here this year that these people are all
different. Now, how can you treat them all alike?
Different in what way did you mean? Well, I said
they think differently. They don't look the same.
They act differently. One will try to cheat you
weighing cotton, and one is so honest that he may be
the other way around. I said some of them are
strong, some of them are weak, some of them eat more
than the others. Some of them are... are smarter
than the others. I said, they're all different,
and you want me to treat them all alike? He said, I
want you to treat them all alike from the
standpoint of fairness and justice.
And so that bothered me for about 25 years. Treat
them all alike when they're all different.
And that, at age 10, is when I started my study of
people, because here was a wagon or a tractor. The
personality of that tractor, of all the three or
four tractors we had out there, was all the same.
But the personality of those people out there were
all different. And
this is where I think you have to understand that
this had a real impact on me back in those days. And I
go back and think about it for the simple reason
that I knew nothing about it. I didn't even know
what the word leadership meant. Back in those
days, we knew The term is a foreman, or a foreman for
this, not the other. Foreman. So, ten years old, my
father entrusted me as a foreman to move these
people.
When I was ten years old, I took a wagon, two mules,
bedding roll,
I spent the night on Red River. Next day I got into
Ardmore and helped move these transits down to
work all summer.
In the fall, my father would take them back because
I would be in school at that time. How'd you get
along with the black people? I got along with them
very well. I learned from one old gentleman named
Jim Sutton, S-U-T-T-O-N, who was an old timer that
lived with us. He and his wife, Virge, lived on our
place all the time, constantly. There were
permanent pictures there. I learned a lot from him
about black people. You do learn a lot with them if
you eat breakfast with them, or they eat with you at
the house, and they're working with you all day and
all night.
You learn a lot about them, about association, and
you. You got that, and you know they're, They're
just like we are. They eat, they sleep, they work,
wear the same kind of clothes. They've got a heart,
a mind, and a soul. And I learned then that there's
no difference between them and us. Well, with your
experience as a young man with the blacks and later
on when there was a civil rights movement in this
country. Did you support that or were you
basically against it or what were your feelings
toward that based on your early years? I felt that
we, the whites, that we the blacks had suffered a
hundred years of injustice. That's the way I felt.
A hundred years of injustice.
And I feel that way today.
Now, some of the catch-up things that we've done, I
don't necessarily approve of, but I can
understand them happening. Some of the specific
programs, you think, weren't very wise. Weren't
very wise at all. As a matter of fact, I think you've
jeopardized and made many of the blacks are
shameful of what's happening, and I think this is
very bad. In general, then, you support it? Oh, 100
percent, absolutely, absolutely. And I feel the
same way about the other minorities, the
Mexican-Americans, the same way. I think that
that we oftentimes go overboard in trying to play a
game of catch-up. In other words, if somebody
wants to be a millionaire, you don't do that
overnight.
But I support fairness and justice for all, and the
color of your skin in my view, has nothing to do with
what's in your heart, mind, and soul. Okay. I'll
let you continue with your mother. You started in
telling me a little bit about your mother, but you
never described her. You never told me about her
character. My mother was a—if
you could describe my mother and if she had had the
opportunity, she would have probably been one of
the greatest pianists in this country. Really?
Yes. And she had a
wonderful voice, not unlike her other brothers
and sisters who had wonderful voices. They were a
church singing type. I've never heard my mother
sing many songs other than those which or were of
religious nature. She attempted to teach myself
and my three younger brothers to play the piano.
And because of interest outside the
house, somewhere on the farm or the ranch,
This indoor sports and activities weren't to our
liking, other than reading. I did a tremendous
amount of reading about kerosene light and then
the gas light. What kind of books did you usually
read? I read history books. I read all the
magazines on current affairs that we could get. We
had an old magazine, I don't believe it's around
anymore, Literary Digest.
Got Saturday Evening Post, those types of things
that I think we must have subscribed to. generally
speaking, most all the major magazines at that
time. You mentioned singing in church. Was your
family religious? Yes, very religious,
particularly my mother. What church did you go to?
She was a Baptist, and
I make no bones about the fact that
I joined that church. It was in the schoolhouse,
but I found good reason to get rid of that
as soon as I could. It was very distasteful for me,
even at age eight, nine, or ten, to know that on
Saturday night my father and I had bottled up some
home brew and put it in the cellar and
be in church the next day and the preacher tell me
that anybody that drank beer or anybody that
smoked or anything like that was going to go to hell
when I knew damn well at that age that wasn't the
case so that was very distasteful to me and I
thought well given an opportunity, I'm going to
have to listen to this the rest of my life. And I
didn't. When I was at West Point as an instructor,
Ms. Hollingsworth and our son, we
joined the Episcopalian, either Episcopalian or
Lutheran, so we joined the Episcopalian Church in
England, which we were very fond of and still
active in. But, uh— Was your father religious? My
father belonged to the Baptist Church, and if he
wasn't working on Sunday or there wasn't
something, it was just... You see out on the farm
and ranch, that's seven days, 24 hours a day, and
you don't go anywhere. Maybe you'd go away for a
couple of hours on Sunday afternoon. You had to get
back because you had cattle to feed in the evening.
Maybe we'd all get in the, I never will forget, the
first car that I remember having was a big
four-door Oldsmobile touring car, you know, with
a big top on it, four-door, with
side curtains and a cloth top. I never will forget
looking out at the breakfast room over the kitchen
sink one day and a goat had gotten up on the car and
fell through the top. Had his legs hanging down
through there. But it was a funny looking thing.
Unfortunately, the goat belonged to me and my
mother took a damn view of it. But anyway, there was
just no time. So sometimes
The seven-day Adventist worked on Sunday.
There's a number of German farmers and ranchers in
our area, and they worked on Sunday. And
oftentimes, my father had something he had to do on
Sunday, but he believed in the year after and went
to church as much as possible, but not like my
mother because she was participating in— in the
choir and also playing the piano, so she had to be
there. Was your father ever a leader in the
community? Not to my knowledge, no. No.
He voted in all elections. He spent his whole life
working out there on that farm. What political
party? Was he a member of a political party?
Democrats. He was a Democrat. Well, would you
consider him a liberal, moderate, or
conservative? He was the most conservative that
you've ever seen. He really was. And what would
you—did some of his political views wipe off on
you? Yeah, and I changed the brand from Democrat to
Republican.
When did you do that? As soon as I could, when it
become that. After you moved away from home? After
I moved away from home, yeah. Probably after you
left Texas? After I left Texas in the military. Who
is the authority in the household? My father.
You become a three-star general. In what way do
you, what values do you contribute to your parents
for your success? The early placing of
responsibility
and my willingness to accept the responsibility
and meet my father's standards of discipline and
doing everything right.
And at the same time,
going above and beyond what you learned in the
school
and knowing enough and beginning to learn enough
about things other than what you see each day and
what you learn in school each day. But I think they
the
trust
and the early placing of responsibility and
accepting responsibility, I learned that
in order to get the job done out there and to work
with the men that my father had entrusted to me,
some of them were women, that
I didn't know what I was doing, but I knew that,
yeah, I would like to take off and go fishing, or I'd
like to go over here and lay down while they're out
doing something else and sleep for 30 minutes
before they come back, or I'd like to go to the house
and get some ice water instead of drinking this
warm water out of this jug here that's got a cloth
sack around it to try to keep it going. And I could
have done that,
but I didn't do that. I
decided that I'd drink the same water that they're
drinking and out of the same jug.
As
I look back on that,
I found out what I was doing. I didn't know at the
time. But I was divesting myself of selfish
interests.
In order to deal with people fairly and squarely
and justly,
You can't ask them to do something that you won't do
yourself. You can't ask them to drink that warm
water out of that jug there, and you go to the house
and drink some cold water with some ice in it.
You've got to drink the same thing. So what I'm
saying is, I guess, that don't ever ask people to do
it. do something that you're not willing to do
yourself and if need be prove that then you'll
begin to lead people to do things
and so uh if you want to get involved with people you
gotta divest yourself of selfish interest and I
guess uh over the years of my life,
that's the thing that I see as a fault amongst most
of our people.
I think we're all- Just Americans. Right,
Americans. Okay, you're talking about Americans
in general. I'm talking about Americans in
general. Okay, good. Yes, Americans in general.
failure to divest themselves of their own
personal selfish interests which I in my study of
people I believe is an inherent inborn
characteristic of selfishness. One I do also know
is inherent in our American people and that's
adventurism. They're born with adventure. You
can see that in the in a six-month-old
and study of people. You can see a six-month-old
begin to crawl. Why does he do that? He's looking
for something. He wants to do something. He's
looking for something. And you can watch him pull
up on the coffee table. That's adventure. That's
challenge.
Adventure, challenge, and selfishness, I truly
believe in a healthy youth of America is an inborn
inherited characteristic. And I think you can see
that displayed in the six months old and on up. And
he pulls up on the
coffee table and what attracts him most the
brightest, the most uncommon thing that he's seen
around the place. It might be a red glass ball or
whatever it is. Venture or whatever it is. So, I've
watched this thing for a long, long time. Let's
talk about your education. What were your
favorite subjects? You mentioned before history
books and literature. Did you like that the most? I
liked chemistry. Chemistry. I liked chemistry. I
liked the hands-on things. I was a very poor
student, a very good student, I think, in high
school. The most attractive thing to me was-
learning to do Future Farmer of America projects.
As a matter of fact, I won several awards down at
Texas A&M as a high school student in
future farmer projects that you have, soldering
and welding and cement mixing and sawing and all
that sort of vocational sort of thing. I liked
that. So I inclined toward that sort of thing,
engineering. And so you were a member of the Future
Farmers of America. Oh, yes. Did you have any roles
of leadership when you were? Oh, yes. So you
started your career as a leader quite young. Yes,
exactly right. And where was that? I was in Sanger,
Texas after I had left the Eighth grade, as I say, I
lived seven miles away from a community called
Sanger. That was the post office. That was the high
school area. That was where you bought all your
food and that sort of stuff. And I made that seven
miles every day either by horseback or walked.
Remember, that's 14 miles a day.
Now, to play football, in addition, and you get
through football practice at 5 o'clock, and you
get home and then you drop your books and you go to
work feeding cattle and so on and so forth, so you
finish that off at 9 o'clock when you study. You
don't. So you've got to be awful observant. in the
class if you want to get by. So I did very well.
I had a few problems in English because that was
kind of a foreign thing to my interest. And I
followed through at A&M. You said though that you
were a leader in the Future Farmers. Yes. And what
positions did you have? I started out as secretary
of the Future Farmers my first year, I think, in the
ninth grade. In the tenth grade, I was a vice
president, and I was president of the Future
Farmers chapter there in Sanger. I was
responsible for help organizing these little
fellas and selecting along with Professor
Samuel, Professor Eli Samuel. He's dead now, but
he's a magnificent man. And he was the sort of fella
that'd give me responsibilities.
He allowed me to take his car, for example, and take
five or six of the key Future Farmers of America
from Sanger, all of which is 50 miles north of here,
all the way down to Texas A&M, meet him down there.
He'd drive somebody else's car. He'd give me that
responsibility. He was a professor at A&M. He was a
later professor at A&M. He was a professor there
and the superintendent of the school, a singer. So
he was an influential fellow in my life. And
it's that sort of thing that brought this on. Did
you consider yourself popular in high school?
Were you popular with the other students? Yes, I
think so. I don't know of any enemies I had.
Sometimes you have some, you don't know it, you
know, but most of the time you know who they are. But
as far as I know, I had none. When you graduated from
high school, did you have firm aims about what you
wanted to do? I mean, had you made up your mind, I
want to go to A&M or? Did you think maybe military
academy or just what did you think when you
graduated? Well, my dad wanted me to be a doctor of
veterinary medicine.
And we had no money for me to go to school on. Zero. We
never lacked for food or clothing or anything like
that.
And didn't have any debts. But when you make a
bumper crop of oats or wheat and you
sell it at the end of the year at the harvest time and
it just barely pays the fuel bill and doesn't even
pay you for your labor and so on and so forth, how can
you send a guy that takes his A&M even if it's only
for $5 a year? How do you do it? Well, I'll tell you
how you do it. Mr. Samuel, Professor Samuel is
interested enough in your capabilities and what
he sees in you that he assists you in getting a job. I
went to North Texas Agricultural College out here
for one year and got off a few credits, but I worked
the whole time I was there. Then I wanted to go to
A&M. So this was kind of a prep school up here. I
worked most of the time. And then Mr. Samuels
helped me get a job at Texas A&M in the creamery down
there across the tracks. And I had done real well in
freshman chemistry. like that sort of stuff. And
first thing you knew, I became the lab technician
there. Well, what does that encompass? That
encompass getting up at four o'clock in the
morning
and start sampling milk coming into that plant
down there from all over Brazos County and so
forth. Sampling that milk and then going and
running the chemical analysis tests on it and then
getting that out promptly and giving it to the
farmer who's standing by as to what his bacterial
count was or whatever the fat content was usually
the fat content I run the bacterial count a little
later because you know you had to cultivate that a
little bit and uh but he has to know what what the
butterfat content is because that's what you're
going to pay him per hundred weight on and I had to do
that while he was while his truck was waiting and
get that on a piece of paper and our and they finally
all got in about uh uh 7 45 then I had to run take a
shower and made an 8 10 class
and then in the afternoon uh It was four o'clock
after school. We finished up about 830. That's how
much I had to work in order to stay down there. I
think we got 20 cents an hour or something. I'm not
sure what it was.
So you usually put in about eight hours a day. I
worked eight hours a day and tried to take 16
credits and I'd bust the hell out of English and do
well on the other subjects and when I finished off
down there I lacked one or two grade points of being
able to go up and get my diploma and so they deferred
my my diploma for one year because I was short a
couple of grade points, but that didn't bother me a
damn bit. They couldn't treat me harshly because
I'd learned a hell of a lot. It was a great hardship,
and I'd learned the preciseness that my father had
taught me was not in the subjects and the manner in
which the professors had puttin' it across, but
was in the hardships that I'd suffered in order to
stay in down there, and the military. Did they send
you your diploma the next year, then? Yes. Yes.
They sent me my diploma the next year. That's all
right. I don't mind that. No. Hellfire. Did you
ever think about going or applying for West Point?
I
guess that that was so far away, and for a farm guy to
do that, that was just beyond my capabilities at
that time to even apply.
I was happy, though, when West Point selected me as
the first non-West Point graduate to go back there
as an instructor.
Did the fact that we had a Corps of Cadets have
anything to do with your deciding to go to A&M? Yes,
it did. Will you explain?
I was here at— NTHC, they had North Texas
Agricultural College.
You could either join the ROTC or not.
And I watched,
I watched
for about a week these fellows all in the same
uniform and They were doing things together, and
they had a leader out there, and they had junior
leaders.
I said to myself,
that's the sort of thing that would really be nice
if I could progress up to be a leader of those guys
there.
I haven't seen anything else around here that's
demanding from the standpoint of somebody being
in charge and people reacting.
And I knew they had a big corps of cadets at Texas
A&M, and I thought the bigger the cadet corps, the
better chance you've got of progressing up to some
leadership.
And I think that's what inspired me more to go to
A&M. So it was a combination of the military and the
desire to be a veterinarian? Yes, and my father was
pushing me on the veterinarian business, but when
I got out of A&M, I looked at this business of five
years and studying, and there was just no way that I
could stay in school down there and work, and
ever become a doctor of veterinary medicine. I
mean, the requirements are very demanding,
and you've got to be able to put forth time to study.
And, hell, when did I study?
When do you study if you're working seven or eight
hours a day?
When do you do that? Let me tell you what you've got
to do. You've got to somehow or another,
regardless of how little sleep and how tired you
are, you've got to stay awake. in class and listen
and make notes on everything and be able to read the
notes after you make them.
That's what you've got to do.
And you've got to have a book and you've got to, when
somebody else wants to go out and play some
softball or something, Whenever it is you've got
some free time, you've got to thumb through those
books and inspect these things and pick out what
you think is important. And sometimes you miss.